Before we talk about network security, we need to understand in general terms what security is. Security is a continuous process of protecting an object from unauthor- ized access. It is as state of being or feeling protected from harm. That object in that state may be a person, an organization such as a business, or property such as a computer system or a file. Security comes from secure which means, according to Webster Dictionary, a state of being free from care, anxiety, or fear [1]. An object can be in a physical state of security or a theoretical state of security. In a physical state, a facility is secure if it is protected by a barrier like a fence, has secure areas both inside and outside, and can resist penetration by intruders. This state of security can be guaranteed if the following four protection mechanisms are in place: deterrence, prevention, detection, and response.

- **Deterrence** is usually the first line of defense against intruders who may try to gain access. It works by creating an atmosphere intended to frighten intruders. Sometimes this may involve warnings of severe consequences if security is breached.
- **Prevention** s the process of trying to stop intruders from gaining access to the resources of the system. Barriers include firewalls, demilitalized zones (DMZs), and use of access items like keys, access cards, biometrics, and others to allow only authorized users to use and access a facility. 
- **Detection** occurs when the intruder has succeeded or is in the process of gaining access to the system. Signals from the detection process include alerts to the existence of an intruder. Sometimes these alerts can be real time or stored for further analysis by the security personnel.
- **Response** is an aftereffect mechanism that tries to respond to the failure of the first three mechanisms. It works by trying to stop and/or prevent future damage or access to a facility.

The areas outside the protected system can be secured by wire and wall fencing, mounted noise or vibration sensors, security lighting, closed circuit television (CCTV), buried seismic sensors, or different photoelectric and microwave systems. Inside the system, security can be enhanced by using electronic barriers such as firewalls and passwords.

Digital barriers – commonly known as firewalls, discussed in detail in Chapter 12, can be used. Firewalls are hardware or software tools used to isolate the sensitive por- tions of an information system facility from the outside world and limit the potential damage by a malicious intruder.

A theoretical state of security, commonly known as pseudosecurity or security through obsecurity (STO) is a false hope of security. Many believe that an object can be secure as long as nobody outside the core implementation group has knowl- edge about its existence. This security is often referred to as “bunk mentality” secu- rity. This is virtual security in the sense that it is not physically implemented like building walls, issuing passwords, or putting up a firewall, but it is effectively based solely on a philosophy. The philosophy itself relies on a need to know basis, imply- ing that a person is not dangerous as long as that person doesn’t have knowledge that could affect the security of the system like a network, for example. In real sys- tems where this security philosophy is used, security is assured through a presump- tion that only those with responsibility and who are trustworthy can use the system and nobody else needs to know. So, in effect, the philosophy is based on the trust of those involved assuming that they will never leave. If they do, then that means the end of security for that system. 

There are several examples where STO has been successfully used. These include Coca-Cola, KFC, and other companies that have, for generations, kept their secret recipes secure based on a few trusted employees. But the overall STO is a fallacy that has been used by many software producers when they hide their codes. Many times, STO hides system vulnerabilities and weaknesses. This was demon- strated vividly in Matt Blaze’s 1994 discovery of a flaw in the Escrowed Encryption Standard (Clipper) that could be used to circumvent law-enforcement monitoring. Blaze’s discovery allowed easier access to secure communication through the Clip- per technology than was previously possible, without access to keys. The belief that secrecy can make the system more secure is just that, a belief – a myth in fact. Unfortunately, the software industry still believes this myth. 

Although its usefulness has declined as the computing environment has changed to large open systems, new networking programming and network protocols, and as the computing power available to the average person has increased, the philosophy is in fact still favored by many agencies, including the military, many government agencies, and private businesses.

In either security state, many objects can be thought of as being secure if such a state, a condition, or a process is afforded to them. Because there are many of these objects, we are going to focus on the security of a few of these object models. These will be a computer, a computer network, and information.

## Computer Security

This is a study, which is a branch of Computer Science, focusing on creating a secure environment for the use of computers. It is a focus on the “behavior of users,” if you will, required and the protocols in order to create a secure environment for anyone using computers. This field, therefore, involves four areas of interest: the study of computer ethics, the development of both software and hardware protocols, and the development of best practices. It is a complex field of study involving detailed mathe- matical designs of cryptographic protocols. We are not focusing on this in this book.

## Network Security

As we saw in chapter 1, computer networks are distributed networks of comput- ers that are either strongly connected meaning that they share a lot of resources from one central computer or loosely connected, meaning that they share only those resources that can make the network work. When we talk about computer network security, our focus object model has now changed. It is no longer one computer but a network. So computer network security is a broader study of computer security. It is still a branch of computer science, but a lot broader than that of computer security. It involves creating an environment in which a computer network, including all its resources, which are many; all the data in it both in storage and in transit; and all its users are secure. Because it is wider than computer security, this is a more complex field of study than computer security involving more detailed mathematical designs of cryptographic, communication, transport, and exchange protocols and best prac- tices. This book focuses on this field of study.

## Information Security

Information security is even a bigger field of study including computer and com- puter network security. This study is found in a variety of disciplines, including computer science, business management, information studies, and engineering. It involves the creation of a state in which information and data are secure. In this model, information or data is either in motion through the communication channels or in storage in databases on server. This, therefore, involves the study of not only more detailed mathematical designs of cryptographic, communication, transport, and exchange protocols and best practices, but also the state of both data and infor- mation in motion. We are not discussing these in this book.